Cloud native java microservices with istio (#1008)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2021-12-16-cloud-native-java-microservices-with-istio.md

---
layout: blog_post

> title: "Build Cloud Native Java Microservices with a Service Mesh on Google Cloud"

Reviewer: What keywords are you targeting?

Author: updated to target cloud native, istio and jhipster

> title: "Build Cloud Native Java Microservices with a Service Mesh on Google Cloud"

Reviewer: What keywords are you targeting?

author: deepu-sasidharan
by: advocate
communities: [devops, kubernetes, java, javascript]

> description: "Build a OIDC secured cloud native Java microservice stack on Google Kubernetes Engine using Istio and JHipster"

Reviewer: I'd remove OIDC from this sentence and add a period at the end.

> description: "Build a OIDC secured cloud native Java microservice stack on Google Kubernetes Engine using Istio and JHipster"

Reviewer: I'd remove OIDC from this sentence and add a period at the end.

Today we will look at building a cloud native Java microservice stack that utilizes a service mesh to provide most of the distributed system needs and will deploy it to the cloud using Kubernetes.

So here is what we will be doing today:

- Build a Java microservice stack using JHipster, Spring Boot and Spring Cloud
- Configure to use Okta as the OAuth2 provider
- Create a Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) cluster
- Deploy Istio service mesh to the cluster
- Setup monitoring and observability
- Deploy and monitor the microservices to the cluster

Let's get started!

{% include toc.md %}

**Pre-requisites**

- A [Google Cloud Platform](https://cloud.google.com/) account

> - An Okta account. You can sign up for a [free Okta account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/). Or, you can use the [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/) setup generated by JHipster.

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention Keycloak here because JHipster doesn't generate Kubernetes files for Keycloak.

Istio specifically provides the following features.

- Secure service-to-service communication over TLS. Of course with support for identity based authentication and authorization.
- Service discovery, so that your microservices can discover each other
- Automatic load balancing for the services
- Traffic control features like routing, circuit breaking, retries, fail-overs and fault injection.
- A pluggable policy layer that can enforce stuff like access control, rate limiting, A/B testing, traffic splits, quotas and so on.
- It also provides automatic metrics, logs, and traces for all traffic within the cluster from Ingres to Egress and between pods.

### What is Istio Service Mesh?

> Let's take a quick look at Istio internals. The Istio architecture can be classified into 2 distinct planes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a quick look at Istio internals. The Istio architecture can be classified into two distinct planes.
```

Spell out numbers below 10.

{% img blog/cloud-native-java-microservices-with-istio/istio-architecture.png alt:"Istio Service Mesh Architecture" width:"900" %}{: .center-image }

**Data plane**: It's made of [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/) proxies deployed as sidecars to our application containers. Envoy is a high performance, lightweight distributed proxy. It controls all the incoming and outgoing traffic to the container its attached to.

**Control plane**: It consists of the istiod demon and takes care of managing and configuring the envoy proxies to route traffic. It also enforces policies and collects telemetry. It has components like Pilot for traffic management, Citadel to manage security, and Galley to manage configurations.

We can use tools like [Grafana](https://grafana.com/), [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [Kiali](https://www.kiali.io/) and [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/) for Monitoring and Observability as they work well with the telemetry provided by Istio. You can use this or use your existing monitoring stack as well.

## Build a Java Microservices Stack using JHipster

> Before you proceed, ensure you have installed JHipster. If not install it using the command `npm -g install generator-jhipster`. At the moment of writing i'm using the JHipster version **7.4.0**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you proceed, ensure you have installed JHipster. If not install it using the command `npm -g install generator-jhipster`. At the moment of writing, I'm using the JHipster version **7.4.0**
```

7.5.0 is out now.

We will be using the [JHipster Domain Language (JDL)](https://www.jhipster.tech/jdl/intro) to define our microservices, entities and deployment options. But first, lets take a look at the architecture we will be building today.

{% img blog/cloud-native-java-microservices-with-istio/istio-ms-architecture.png alt:"Istio Microservice Architecture" width:"900" %}{: .center-image }

> We have the Istio control plane taking care of policy, load balancing and so on. We also have the Istio Ingress gateway that will route all external traffic to our applications. We have 4 microservices. First is a gateway application created by JHipster that acts as our React GUI and authentication layer. The remaining are services that provides APIs. Each of our containers will have an envoy proxy as a sidecar that is auto injected. We hook up Grafana, Prometheus, Zipkin and Kiali to the telemetry provided by Istio so that we have monitoring and observability for our cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have the Istio control plane taking care of policy, load balancing and so on. We also have the Istio Ingress gateway that will route all external traffic to our applications. We have four microservices. First is a gateway application created by JHipster that acts as our React GUI and authentication layer. The remaining are services that provide APIs. Each of our containers will have an envoy proxy as a sidecar that is auto-injected. We hook up Grafana, Prometheus, Zipkin, and Kiali to the telemetry provided by Istio so that we have monitoring and observability for our cluster.
```

Each microservice also has its own database.

> Its not an overly complex architecture but it's also not that simple. First, let us define our microservice using JDL. Create a file called **app.jdl** and paste the following content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's not an overly complex architecture but it's also not that simple. First, let us define our microservice using JDL. Create a file called `app.jdl` and paste the following content into it.
```

Backticks for filenames and class names. Bold for buttons and things you need to click when navigating.

> ```kotlin

Reviewer: I'd remove the language since some renderers will show the language and it's not Kotlin.

application {
  config {
    baseName store
    applicationType gateway
    packageName com.okta.developer.store
    serviceDiscoveryType no
    authenticationType oauth2
    prodDatabaseType postgresql
    cacheProvider hazelcast
    buildTool gradle
    clientFramework react
  }
  entities *
}

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra line break.

application {
  config {
    baseName product
    applicationType microservice
    packageName com.okta.developer.product
    serviceDiscoveryType no
    authenticationType oauth2
    prodDatabaseType postgresql
    cacheProvider hazelcast
    buildTool gradle
    serverPort 8081
  }
  entities Product, ProductCategory, ProductOrder, OrderItem
}

application {
  config {
    baseName invoice
    applicationType microservice
    packageName com.okta.developer.invoice
    serviceDiscoveryType no
    authenticationType oauth2
    prodDatabaseType postgresql
    buildTool gradle
    serverPort 8082
  }
  entities Invoice, Shipment
}

application {
  config {
    baseName notification
    applicationType microservice
    packageName com.okta.developer.notification
    serviceDiscoveryType no
    authenticationType oauth2
    databaseType mongodb
    cacheProvider no
    enableHibernateCache false
    buildTool gradle
    serverPort 8083
  }
  entities Notification
}
```

> It's quite straightforward. Each application defines its name, package name, authentication type, database and so on. Please refer to the [JDL applications documentation](https://www.jhipster.tech/jdl/applications) for all supported options and configurations. Each application also defines the `applicationType` and the entities it serves. So next step would be to add these entities.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say it's straightforward. It's like saying "it's simple". It might be simple for us, but it can be a lot for a newbie.

> It's quite straightforward. Each application defines its name, package name, authentication type, database and so on. Please refer to the [JDL applications documentation](https://www.jhipster.tech/jdl/applications) for all supported options and configurations. Each application also defines the `applicationType` and the entities it serves. So next step would be to add these entities.

Reviewer: I would change: So next step would be to add these entities.

to: Next, add the entity definitions to the `app.jdl` you just created.

```kotlin
/**
 * Entities for Store Gateway
 */
// Customer for the store
entity Customer {

>     firstName String required

Reviewer: The first JDL uses 2 spaces and this uses 4. I'd recommend changing this file to 2 spaces.

    paymentAmount BigDecimal required
}

enum InvoiceStatus {
    PAID, ISSUED, CANCELLED
}

entity Shipment {
    trackingCode String
    date Instant required
    details String
}

enum PaymentMethod {
    CREDIT_CARD, CASH_ON_DELIVERY, PAYPAL
}

relationship OneToMany {
    Invoice{shipment} to Shipment{invoice(code) required}
}

service Invoice, Shipment with serviceClass
paginate Invoice, Shipment with pagination
microservice Invoice, Shipment with invoice

/**
 * Entities for notification microservice
 */
entity Notification {
    date Instant required
    details String
    sentDate Instant required
    format NotificationType required
    userId Long required
    productId Long required
}

enum NotificationType {
    EMAIL, SMS, PARCEL
}

microservice Notification with notification
```

We define entities for each service and mark the entities as microservice entities. We also define relationships between entities, enums and other options like pagination, service layer and so on. Please refer to JDL [Entities](https://www.jhipster.tech/jdl/entities-fields) and [relationships](https://www.jhipster.tech/jdl/relationships) documentation for more possibilities.

> Now, we are ready to run JHipster. Open a terminal window on the folder where you saved the JDL and run the below command.

Reviewer: I think you should mention (and maybe even show) that you should create a directory for everything.

```
mkdir jhipster-istio
cd jhipster-istio
```

```bash

> $ jhipster jdl app.jdl --fork

Reviewer: Why fork? I've never used this option before.

```

This will create the applications with all its entities and specified configurations. You should be able to see the gateway application in action by running the below command on the **store** folder. You will be redirected to Keycloak for login.

```bash
$ docker-compose -f src/main/docker/keycloak.yml up -d # starts keycloak in daemon mode
$ ./gradlew # starts the spring boot application
```

> You can find a [sample application on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-java-spring-k8s-istio-microservices-example).

Reviewer: I'd change this to:

You can find the source code for this generated application on GitHub.

## Configure Okta as Identity Provider

> The applications are configured by default to use Keycloak as the identity provider since we choose OAuth2 as authentication mechanism. However, you can switch to any other OAuth2 provider by editing the **application.yml** file for each of the applications.

Reviewer: OAuth2 -> OAuth 2.0

Change **application.yml** to `application.yml`

Let's see how to configure Okta as the identity provider. You may wonder? Why Okta? Keycloak is great for development and testing but its not robust for production as you would need to manage it and keep it updated and so on. Okta on the other hand lets you worry about your business needs by keeping your identity requirements always on and secure.

### Create an Okta application

{% include setup/cli.md type="jhipster" %}

### Configure OpenID Connect settings to use Okta

Open `src/main/resources/config/application.yml` file for each application and update `issuer-uri`, `client-id` and `client-secret` under the `spring.security.oauth2.client` section as shown below with values you obtained during previous step.

```yml
spring:
  ...
  security:
    oauth2:
      client:
        provider:
          oidc:
            issuer-uri: https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default
        registration:
          oidc:
            client-id: {yourClientId}
            client-secret:
            scope: openid,profile,email

> ```

Reviewer: Couldn't you do this in JHipster Registry's Spring Cloud Config so you don't have to do it for each microservice?

Reviewer: It's also a bit easier to generate use the `.okta.env`. For example:

```
source .okta.env
cd <app>
./gradlew
```

> **Note**: For security reasons we will not set the client-secret on this file and instead use environment variable, `SPRING_SECURITY_OAUTH2_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET` or Kubernetes secrets. You can also skip updating the application.yml files altogether and use environment variable or Kubernetes secrets for all the OIDC configurations.

> You can run `./gradlew` on the store application to test the Okta login. Make sure to set the client secret environment variable first.

Reviewer: I'm able to log in to the store using Okta, but I'm not able to navigate to any entities. I get 404 errors. Is that expected? If so, you should explain why.

## Create a GKE Cluster and Install Istio

In order to deploy the stack to Google Kubernetes Engine, we need to create a cluster and install Istio. So lets begin by creating a cluster using Google CLoud SDK.

### Create a cluster

> Make sure you are logged into the gcloud CLI and run the below command to create a GKE cluster.

Reviewer: Does "logged into the gcloud CLI" mean using the `gcloud` CLI locally? Or does it mean using https://console.cloud.google.com/? I think it'd be good to clarify here.

```bash
# set region and zone
$ gcloud config set compute/region europe-west1
$ gcloud config set compute/zone europe-west1-b
# Create a project and enable container APIs

> $ gcloud projects create jhipster-demo # You need to also enable billing via GUI

Reviewer: You might want to mention that you'll need another name here since "jhipster-demo" is already in use.

$ gcloud config set project jhipster-demo
$ gcloud services enable container.googleapis.com

# Create GKE Cluster
$ gcloud container clusters create hello-hipster \
     --num-nodes 4 \
     --machine-type n1-standard-2

> ```

Reviewer: I would remove the `$ ` prefix so people can copy and paste easier.

This could take anywhere between 5-15 minutes. `--machine-type` is important as we need more CPU than what is available in the default setup. Once the cluster is created it should be set automatically as the current Kubernetes context. You can verify that by running `kubectl config current-context`. IF the new cluster is not set as the current context, you can set it by running `gcloud container clusters get-credentials hello-hipster`.

{% img blog/cloud-native-java-microservices-with-istio/kdash-clusters.png alt:"GKE Cluster nodes" width:"900" %}{: .center-image }

> > **Note**: I'm using [KDash](https://kdash.cli.rs/) to monitor the cluster, you can try it or use kubectl, [k9s](https://github.com/derailed/k9s) and so on as you prefer.

Reviewer: I would remove the > and just use **NOTE:**. If you want to have cool admonitions automatically, switch from markdown to Asciidoctor. ;)

### Install Istio to cluster

As of writing this, i'm using Istio version 1.12.1. You can install **istioctl** by running the below command, preferably from the home directory.

```bash
$ export ISTIO_VERSION=1.12.1
$ curl -L https://istio.io/downloadIstio | sh -
$ cd istio-$ISTIO_VERSION
$ export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH
```

You should now be able to run **istioctl** from the command line. Now, we can use the CLI to Install Istio to the GKE cluster. Istio provides few [Helm](https://helm.sh/) profiles out of the box, so for demo purposes i'll obviously use the demo profile. You can choose the production or dev profile as well. The command should install Istio and setup everything required on our cluster.

```bash
$ istioctl install --set profile=demo -y
```

> **Note**: If you run into any trouble with firewall or user privilege issues, please refer to [GKE setup guide from Istio](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/platform-setup/gke/).

> Once the installation is complete, we would need to fetch the External IP of the Istio Ingress Gateway. If you are using KDash, you can see it on the services tab or you can run this command to get it using kubectl: `kubectl get svc istio-ingressgateway -n istio-system`

Reviewer: This command might look better on its own line.

  dockerRepositoryName "<your-docker-repository-name>"
  serviceDiscoveryType no
  istio true
  kubernetesServiceType Ingress
  kubernetesNamespace jhipster
  ingressDomain "<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io"
  ingressType gke
}
```

I hope its self explanatory. You can refer the JDL deployment documentation for all the available options. We have enabled Istio and set the ingress domain to the external IP of the Istio Ingress Gateway that we notes earlier. Make sure to use a docker repo where you have push rights.

Now run the following command from the root folder where you ran the previous `jhipster jdl` command.

```bash
$ jhipster jdl deployment.jdl
```

This will create a new folder, **kubernetes**, with all the required Kubernetes manifests like deployments, services, Istio virtual services, gateways and so on for all the applications, databases, monitoring and so on.

{% img blog/cloud-native-java-microservices-with-istio/k8s-deployment.png alt:"JHipster JDL deployment" width:"900" %}{: .center-image }

As you can see, there is also a bunch of useful commands printed on the console that you can use to do the deployment.

### Update OIDC configuration

> At this point we have everything ready, but since we didn't add the Okta OIDC client secret to the **application.yml** files, we need to add them as Kubernetes secrets. Under **kubernetes/store** folder add a new file names **okta-oidc-secrets.yml** with below content. You should ignore this file from GIT for security reasons.

Reviewer: Change bold to backticks.

Reviewer: GIT > git

Reviewer: You can mention my post from last year that shows how to encrypt your secrets so you can check in these files.

https://developer.okta.com/blog/2021/06/01/kubernetes-spring-boot-jhipster#encrypt-your-kubernetes-secrets

> ```yml

Reviewer: This might need to be yaml instead of yml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: okta-oidc
  namespace: jhipster
  labels:
    app: okta-oidc
type: Opaque
data:
  oidc-client-secret: <base64-of-your-okta-client-secret>
```

To get base64 of your client secret run the following command. The base64 command will be available if you have openssl installed.

```bash
$ echo -n "your-okta-client-secret" | base64
```

If you didn't add the client-id and issuer-url to the application.yml files, you can add them here or in the deployment spec below as they are not secrets.

Now open the **\*-deployment.yml** file in the **store**, **invoice**, **product** and **notification** folder and add the below to the **env** section of the **containers**.

```yml
- name: SPRING_SECURITY_OAUTH2_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET
  valueFrom:
    secretKeyRef:
      name: okta-oidc
      key: oidc-client-secret
```

> Here is the **kubernetes/store/store-deployment.yml** file with the change for reference.

Reviewer: Change bold to backticks.

```yml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: store
  namespace: jhipster
spec:
  ...
  template:
    ...
    spec:
      ...
      containers:
        - name: store-app
          image: deepu105/store
          env:
            - name: SPRING_PROFILES_ACTIVE
              value: prod
            ...
            - name: SPRING_SECURITY_OAUTH2_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET
              valueFrom:
                secretKeyRef:
                  name: okta-oidc
                  key: oidc-client-secret
          resources:
            ...
```

### Deploy to GKE

> We ready to deploy now. First, we need to build and push the images to the registry. For this we can use the handy [JIB](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib) commands provided by JHipster. Navigate to each of the microservice folder and run the command below.

Reviewer: JIB > Jib (this is what their GitHub repo has)

```bash
$ cd store && ./gradlew bootJar -Pprod jib -Djib.to.image=deepu105/store
$ cd invoice && ./gradlew bootJar -Pprod jib -Djib.to.image=deepu105/invoice
$ cd notification && ./gradlew bootJar -Pprod jib -Djib.to.image=deepu105/notification

> $ cd product && ./gradlew bootJar -Pprod jib -Djib.to.image=deepu105/product

Reviewer: Remove $ so commands can be copy/pasted. Maybe even set the username as a variable first so there's only one line that needs to be changed by the person doing the tutorial?

```

> Once the images are pushed to the docker registry, we can deploy the stack using the handy script provided by JHipster. Navigate to the kubernetes folder created by JHipster and run the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the images are pushed to the Docker registry, we can deploy the stack using the handy script provided by JHipster. Navigate to the `kubernetes` folder created by JHipster and run the following command.
```

```bash
$ cd kubernetes
$ ./kubectl-apply.sh -f
```

Once the deployments are done we need to wait for the pods to be in **RUNNING** status. Useful links will be printed on the terminal, make note of them.

{% img blog/cloud-native-java-microservices-with-istio/jhipster-deployment.png alt:"GKE cluster with application pods" width:"900" %}{: .center-image }

> You can now access the application at the given `http://store.jhipster.<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io` URI but you wont be able to login with Okta as we did not specify these URIs in the Okta OIDC application. Head over to the Okta admin console, `https://<your-okta-domain>.okta.com`, and navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** and open the application you created earlier. Edit the **General Settings** and add `http://store.jhipster.<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io/login/oauth2/code/oidc` as **Sign-in redirect URI** and `http://store.jhipster.<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io/` as **Sign-out redirect URI** and click **Save**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now access the application at the given `http://store.jhipster.<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io` URI but you wont be able to login with Okta as we did not specify these URIs in the Okta OIDC application. Head over to the Okta admin console, `https://<your-okta-domain>.okta.com`, and navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** and open the application you created earlier. Edit the **General Settings** and add `http://store.jhipster.<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io/login/oauth2/code/oidc` as a **Sign-in redirect URI** and `http://store.jhipster.<istio-ingress-gateway-external-ip>.nip.io/` as a **Sign-out redirect URI** and click **Save**.
```
